Q: Program does not work; it produces some error message 
   like "Cannot open input/output sound device"
A: Make sure your sound card driver is installed properly. Also make sure
   that your sound card is full-duplex, and full-duplex mode is supported
   by the driver.
   Another reason may be that your sound card does not support
   the sampling parameters of 44100 Hz/16bit/mono. Currently it is
   impossible to fix without recompilation; this will be changed in the future
   releases. To recompile, change sampling parameters in the file
   src/pump.h.

Q: It seems GNUitar works, but I can't hear effects applied 
   to my guitar sound. "Clean" sound of the guitar is send to the speakers,
   but with no applied effects. I hear native noise of effects, and it 
   seems like there is zero input signal send to effects.
A: Make sure your line input or microphone input levels are not zero.
   Use your OS mixer program to adjust input levels.

Q: I hear both clean and processed signal in the speakers.
A: Press "mute" checkbox on the line input channel in your mixer program
   to suppress clean sound.

Q: GNUitar noises terribly !
A: You should adjust your mixer properly. Set the line input to maximum level,
   wave out and master volume to middle level, and then start to decrease
   master volume until the noise will become minimal. Increase volume
   on your external amplifier.
   The reason of problem is that most soundcards have poor signal/noise ratio
   in full-duplex mode.
   To eliminate noise, you may do the following:
   o use protected cable to connect guitar into the PC;
   o ground your PC properly;
   o there is a possible noisy card (video/modem/LAN) on the motherboard 
     next to your soundcard. Try to move sound card as far as possible
     from it.
   o try to use high quality low-noise pre-amplifier BETWEEN your guitar
     and PC. Please be extremely careful with the volume control of
     your pre-amp -- the sound card can be damaged if you set loud volume
     on the pre-amp. The main goal of pre-amplifier is to decrease
     signal/noise ratio between the signal will be passed to sound card.
     Please understand that the program processes both signal and noise,
     and the noise in the output is just the input noise amplified and
     distorted by effects.
   o use the effect "sustain" as a pre-amp. Set "Gate" and "Sustain"
     parameters to 100%.
